CMPUT 175 - Lab 9: Sorting
Goal: Gain an in-depth understanding of the selection sort and merge sort algorithms, and
practice using recursion.
Exercise 0:
Download and complete the two practice worksheets on eClass to become more familiar with
various sorting algorithms. Be prepared to talk about your work with your TA for any questions
related to the selection sort and the merge sort.
Exercise 1:
In this exercise, you will implement two sorting algorithms: selection sort and merge sort.
Implement both of the algorithms using recursion, and compute their time to sort different lists of
data.
Task 1: Selection Sort
a. Implement a selection sort algorithm using recursion to sort a list of numbers in
descending order. Start with the file, exercise_1.py, downloaded from eClass.
DO NOT RENAME THIS FILE.
b. Complete the function recursive_selection_sort() in this file. You may want
to define your own additional functions to complete the task, but they must be called
inside of recursive_selection_sort(). Your function should sort a list inplace,
so it will not need to return the sorted list.
c. Test your solution with the tests provided in test_selection_sort.py file. (i.e.
just run it.) Make sure your sorting function passes all the tests.
Task 2: Merge Sort
a. Implement merge sort using recursion to sort a list of numbers in descending order.
Complete the function recursive_merge_sort()in exercise_1.py. You
may want to define your own additional functions to complete the task, but these
functions must be called inside recursive_merge_sort(). This function does
NOT sort the list in-place, so don’t forget to return the sorted list from the function.
b. Test your solution with the tests provided in test_merge_sort.py file. Make sure
your sorting function passes all the tests.
Once you have successfully completed Task 1 and 2, you may run the exercise_1.py file.
Its __main__ portion compares how long each sort function takes to sort lists of (a) randomly
generated integers, (b) ascending integers, and (c) descending integers. This part is already
written for you. Which sorting algorithm takes the least amount of time to sort each list?
